~*~UNIX commands~*~

ls --- lists your files 

ls -l --- lists your files in 'long format', which contains lots of useful information, e.g. the exact size of the file, who owns the file and who has the right to look at it, and when it was last modified. 

ls -a --- lists all files, including the ones whose filenames begin in a dot, which you do not always want to see. 

more filename --- shows the first part of a file, just as much as will fit on one screen. 

mv filename1 filename2 --- moves a file (i.e. gives it a different name, or moves it into a different directory (see below)

cp filename1 filename2 --- copies a file

rm filename --- removes a file. It is wise to use the option rm -i, which will ask you for confirmation 

diff filename1 filename2 --- compares files

wc filename --- tells you how many lines, words, and characters there are in a file

chmod options filename --- lets you change the read, write, and execute permissions on your files. The default is that only you can look at them and change them, but you may sometimes want to change these permissions. For example, chmod o+r filename will make the file readable for everyone, and chmod o-r filename will make it unreadable for others again. Note that for someone to be able to actually look at the file the directories it is in need to be at least executable. See help protection for more details.
File Compression

gzip filename --- compresses files, so that they take up much less space. Usually text files compress to about half their original size, but it depends very much on the size of the file and the nature of the contents. There are other tools for this purpose, too (e.g. compress), but gzip usually gives the highest compression rate. Gzip produces files with the ending '.gz' appended to the original filename.

gunzip filename --- uncompresses files compressed by gzip.

gzcat filename --- lets you look at a gzipped file without actually having to gunzip it (same as gunzip -c). You can even print it directly, using gzcat filename | lpr

~*~Directories~*~

mkdir dirname --- make a new directory

cd dirname --- change directory

pwd --- tells you where you currently are.

ff --- find files anywhere on the system.  

passwd --- lets you change your password, which you should do regularly (at least once a year). See the LRB guide and/or look at help password.

du filename --- shows the disk usage of the files and directories in filename (without argument the current directory is used). du -s gives only a total.

last yourusername --- lists your last logins

rlogin hostname --- lets you connect to a remote host

ftp hostname --- lets you download files from a remote host which is set up as an ftp-server.

cat -- reads one or more files and prints them to standard output. 

